README.md, before:

# mlo-streamcam

Software and resources for the MLO streaming video camera system.

## Overview

The MLO streaming video camera system is a collection of software and hardware
used to stream a near real-time high-resolution (4k) video stream of the night
sky from the Mauna Loa Observatory (MLO) in Hawaii to YouTube.

The system consists of a digital camera connected to the computer via a [Magewell
capture card](https://www.magewell.com/products/usb-capture-hdmi-4k-plus) as well as a
[Raspberry Pi pico](https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-pico/) that monitors the temperature near the
camera and can also control a relay to reset the camera when needed.

The code for the Raspberry Pi pico is in the `pico-controller` directory. See [pico-controller](#pico-controller) below
for more details.

The [`streamcam.py`](streamcam.py) script supports two sub-commands: `stream` and `monitor`.
The `stream` sub-command is used to start the streaming server. The `monitor` sub-command
is used to read the serial output from the [pico-controller/main.py](pico-controller/main.py) file.

Default parameters for both the commands can be specified in a `.env` file that should be created by the user. At a
minimum this should include the YouTube `STREAM_KEY` environment variable. See the [Settings](#settings)
section below for more details.

The system is controlled by [supervisord](http://supervisord.org/), which starts both the
`stream` and `monitor` commands at system boot.

The `stream` command is started via the [`start-streamcam.sh`](start-streamcam.sh) script in order to also unload and
reload the linux usb drivers.

## Installation

### Requirements

The [`requirements.txt`](requirements.txt) file contains the python requirements for the scripts.

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

To use the [`supervisord.conf`](supervisord.conf) you must have [`supervisor`](http://supervisord.org/) installed:

```bash
sudo apt-get install supervisor
```

The [`supervisord.conf`](supervisord.conf) provided in the repo will start both the `monitor` and `stream` commands and
should be symlinked into the main `supervisord` configuration directory:

```bash
sudo ln -s $PWD/supervisord.conf /etc/supervisor/conf.d/
```

## Usage

### streamcam stream

The video stream is being done by `ffmpeg` via the [`ffmpeg-ptyhon`](https://github.com/kkroening/ffmpeg-python)
wrapper.

Options for ffmpeg are controlled via environment variables. See the [settings](#settings) section below.

The script overlays two text files onto the video, the `banner.txt` in the lower
left corner and the `time.txt` in the lower right.

The `banner.txt` file can be updated manually and will update in the video as soon as the file is saved. If the
environment variable `DEBUG=true` then the contents of `.env` (except the `STREAM_KEY`) will be displayed instead of the banner.

The `time.txt` file is updated automatically by the `monitor` sub-command.

### streamcam monitor

The `monitor` sub-command reads the serial output from the [pico-controller/main.py](pico-controller/main.py) file and
stores it locally as `pico-log.json` text file. It also updates the `time.txt` file with the current time and the
current temperature.

## Settings

<a name="settings"></a>

The `streamcam` script has default settings contained in the [`settings.py`](settings.py) file. These can be
overridden by setting environment variables in a `.env` file that you create in the root directory of the repo.

The `.env` file should contain your YouTube `STREAM_KEY` as well as any other settings you want to override.

For example, to change the default framerate to 30 fps and buffer size to `2M`, create a `.env` file in the same
directory with the following contents:

```bash
STREAM_KEY=your-stream-key
FRAMERATE=30
BUF_SIZE=2M
```

See the [`settings.py`](settings.py) file for a list of all the available settings.

## pico-controller

The pico controls the relays and reads the temperature from inside the camera box.

See the [README](pico-controller/README.md).

Commit message:

Add supervisor restart instructions to readme

README.md, after:

# mlo-streamcam

Software and resources for the MLO streaming video camera system.

## Overview

The MLO streaming video camera system is a collection of software and hardware
used to stream a near real-time high-resolution (4k) video stream of the night
sky from the Mauna Loa Observatory (MLO) in Hawaii to YouTube.

The system consists of a digital camera connected to the computer via a [Magewell
capture card](https://www.magewell.com/products/usb-capture-hdmi-4k-plus) as well as a
[Raspberry Pi pico](https://www.raspberrypi.com/products/raspberry-pi-pico/) that monitors the temperature near the
camera and can also control a relay to reset the camera when needed.

The code for the Raspberry Pi pico is in the `pico-controller` directory. See [pico-controller](#pico-controller) below
for more details.

The [`streamcam.py`](streamcam.py) script supports two sub-commands: `stream` and `monitor`.
The `stream` sub-command is used to start the streaming server. The `monitor` sub-command
is used to read the serial output from the [pico-controller/main.py](pico-controller/main.py) file.

Default parameters for both the commands can be specified in a `.env` file that should be created by the user. At a
minimum this should include the YouTube `STREAM_KEY` environment variable. See the [Settings](#settings)
section below for more details.

The system is controlled by [supervisord](http://supervisord.org/), which starts both the
`stream` and `monitor` commands at system boot.

The `stream` command is started via the [`start-streamcam.sh`](start-streamcam.sh) script in order to also unload and
reload the linux usb drivers.

## Installation

### Requirements

The [`requirements.txt`](requirements.txt) file contains the python requirements for the scripts.

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

To use the [`supervisord.conf`](supervisord.conf) you must have [`supervisor`](http://supervisord.org/) installed:

```bash
sudo apt-get install supervisor
```

The [`supervisord.conf`](supervisord.conf) provided in the repo will start both the `monitor` and `stream` commands and
should be symlinked into the main `supervisord` configuration directory:

```bash
sudo ln -s $PWD/supervisord.conf /etc/supervisor/conf.d/
```

## Usage

The system is controlled by `supervisord`, which is responsible for running both the `stream` and the `monitor` described below. To control the system you should use `supervisorctl` instead of calling the scripts directly.

#### Restarting the service

If you need to manually restart the service call the below two commands:

```bash
sudo supervisorctl stop stream
sudo supervisorctl start stream
```

Note that it takes a few seconds for `stop stream` to kill all the `ffmpeg` processes and for some reason using `supervisorctl restart stream` doesn't wait, so the camera gets jammed.  Always use the explicit `stop/start`.


### streamcam stream

The video stream is being done by `ffmpeg` via the [`ffmpeg-ptyhon`](https://github.com/kkroening/ffmpeg-python)
wrapper.

Options for ffmpeg are controlled via environment variables. See the [settings](#settings) section below.

The script overlays two text files onto the video, the `banner.txt` in the lower
left corner and the `time.txt` in the lower right.

The `banner.txt` file can be updated manually and will update in the video as soon as the file is saved. If the
environment variable `DEBUG=true` then the contents of `.env` (except the `STREAM_KEY`) will be displayed instead of the banner.

The `time.txt` file is updated automatically by the `monitor` sub-command.

### streamcam monitor

The `monitor` sub-command reads the serial output from the [pico-controller/main.py](pico-controller/main.py) file and
stores it locally as `pico-log.json` text file. It also updates the `time.txt` file with the current time and the
current temperature.

## Settings

<a name="settings"></a>

The `streamcam` script has default settings contained in the [`settings.py`](settings.py) file. These can be
overridden by setting environment variables in a `.env` file that you create in the root directory of the repo.

The `.env` file should contain your YouTube `STREAM_KEY` as well as any other settings you want to override.

For example, to change the default framerate to 30 fps and buffer size to `2M`, create a `.env` file in the same
directory with the following contents:

```bash
STREAM_KEY=your-stream-key
FRAMERATE=30
BUF_SIZE=2M
```

See the [`settings.py`](settings.py) file for a list of all the available settings.

## pico-controller

The pico controls the relays and reads the temperature from inside the camera box.

See the [README](pico-controller/README.md).
